38312: Aggregations page (#203)
mongodb/docs-csharp: source/fundamentals/aggregation.txt

.. _csharp-aggregation:

===========
Aggregation
===========

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference
 
.. meta::
   :keywords: code example, transform, pipeline

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 2
   :class: singlecol

Overview
--------

In this guide, you can learn how to use the {+driver-long+} to perform

> **aggregation operations**.

Reviewer: S: redo this section to align more with the page structure on the [Rust aggregation page](https://github.com/mongodb/docs-rust/blob/master/source/fundamentals/aggregation.txt)

That page has a better organization of information and the copy has been updated to align more with the style guide

stages** are the assembly stations, and **operator expressions** are the
specialized tools.

Aggregation Versus Find Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can use find operations to perform the following actions:

- Select which documents to return
- Select which fields to return
- Sort the results

You can use aggregation operations to perform the following actions:

- Perform find operations
- Rename fields
- Calculate fields
- Summarize data
- Group values

Consider the following :manual:`limitations </core/aggregation-pipeline-limits/>` when 
using aggregation operations:

- Returned documents must not violate the :manual:`BSON document size limit </reference/limits/#mongodb-limit-BSON-Document-Size>`
  of 16 megabytes.

- Pipeline stages have a memory limit of 100 megabytes by default. If required, you can exceed this limit by setting
  the `AllowDiskUse <{+new-api-root+}/MongoDB.Driver/MongoDB.Driver.AggregateOptions.AllowDiskUse.html#MongoDB_Driver_AggregateOptions_AllowDiskUse>`__
  property of the ``AggregateOptions`` object that you pass to the ``Aggregate()`` method.

  .. important:: ``$graphLookup`` exception

>      The :manual:`$graphLookup </reference/operator/aggregation/graphLookup/>` stage has
>      a strict memory limit of 100 megabytes and will ignore the ``AllowDiskUse`` property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     The :manual:`$graphLookup </reference/operator/aggregation/graphLookup/>` stage has
     a strict memory limit of 100 megabytes and ignores the ``AllowDiskUse`` property.
```

transformed final product, the finished car.

The assembly line represents the *aggregation pipeline*, the individual
stations represent the *aggregation stages*, the specialized tools
represent the *expression operators*, and the finished product
represents the *aggregated result*.

Compare Aggregation and Find Operations
---------------------------------------

The following table lists the different tasks you can perform with find
operations, compared to what you can achieve with aggregation
operations. The aggregation framework provides expanded functionality
that allows you to transform and manipulate your data.

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 50 50

   * - Find Operations
     - Aggregation Operations

   * - | Select *certain* documents to return
       | Select *which* fields to return
       | Sort the results
       | Limit the results
       | Count the results
     - | Select *certain* documents to return
       | Select *which* fields to return
       | Sort the results
       | Limit the results
       | Count the results
       | Rename fields
       | Compute new fields
       | Summarize data

>        | Connect and merge data sets

Reviewer 2: Add "Group the results".

Server Limitations
------------------

Consider the following :manual:`limitations </core/aggregation-pipeline-limits/>` when 
performing aggregation operations:

- Returned documents must not violate the :manual:`BSON document size limit </reference/limits/#mongodb-limit-BSON-Document-Size>`
  of 16 megabytes.

- Pipeline stages have a memory limit of 100 megabytes by default. If required, you can exceed this limit by setting
  the `AllowDiskUse <{+new-api-root+}/MongoDB.Driver/MongoDB.Driver.AggregateOptions.AllowDiskUse.html#MongoDB_Driver_AggregateOptions_AllowDiskUse>`__

>   property of the ``AggregateOptions`` object that you pass to the ``Aggregate()`` method.

Reviewer 2: Do we want link to API docs here for `AggregateOptions` and possibly `Aggregate`?

Author: We have them linked below in the API Documentation subsection of the Additional Information section.

- The :manual:`$graphLookup </reference/operator/aggregation/graphLookup/>` stage has
  a strict memory limit of 100 megabytes and ignores the ``AllowDiskUse`` property.

Aggregation Example
-------------------

.. note::
  
  This example uses the ``sample_restaurants.restaurants`` collection
  from the :atlas:`Atlas sample datasets </sample-data>`. To learn how to create a

>   free MongoDB Atlas cluster and load the sample datasets, see :ref:`csharp-quickstart`.

Reviewer: S: move this note below the following paragraph

To perform an aggregation, pass a list of aggregation stages to the
``IMongoCollection<TDocument>.Aggregate()`` method.

The following code example produces a count of the number of bakeries in each borough
of New York. To do so, it uses an aggregation pipeline with the following stages:

- A :manual:`$match </reference/operator/aggregation/match/>` stage to filter for documents whose
  ``cuisine`` field contains the value ``"Bakery"``.

- A :manual:`$group </reference/operator/aggregation/group/>` stage to group the matching
  documents by the ``borough`` field, accumulating a count of documents for each distinct value
  of that field.

> We have provided three versions of this example that each provide different approaches to
> defining the aggregation stages used in the example pipeline. The first uses 
> ``BsonDocument`` objects, the second uses LINQ, and the third uses builders.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following tabs contain versions of this example that each provide different approaches to
create and combine the aggregation stages used in the example pipeline. Select from the following :guilabel:`BsonDocument`, :guilabel:`LINQ`, and :guilabel:`Builders` tabs to view an example that uses each API to perform the aggregation.
```

Author: Will take a pass at rewording this while also moving away from the tabs approach.

> .. tabs::

Reviewer: S: would having subsections for these sections be a better alternative to tabs? Sometimes, we avoid putting code examples in tabs as it reduces the searchability of the nested content.

Author: Will split into subsections

>    .. tab:: ``BsonDocument`` approach
>       :tabid: bsondocument

Reviewer: S: remove monospacing from header elements, Also I think that this tab should be last given the technical feedback
```suggestion
   .. tab:: BsonDocument
      :tabid: bsondocument approach
```

Reviewer: same formatting suggestion applies to all three examples

            :language: csharp
            :dedent:
            :start-after: begin-aggregation
            :end-before: end-aggregation
         
         .. output::
            :language: console
            :visible: false

            { _id = Bronx, Count = 71 }
            { _id = Brooklyn, Count = 173 }
            { _id = Staten Island, Count = 20 }
            { _id = Missing, Count = 2 }
            { _id = Manhattan, Count = 221 }
            { _id = Queens, Count = 204 }

   .. tab:: Builders approach
      :tabid: builders

      .. io-code-block::

         .. input:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/BuilderAggregation.cs
            :language: csharp
            :dedent:
            :start-after: begin-aggregation
            :end-before: end-aggregation
         
         .. output::
            :language: console
            :visible: false

            { _id = Bronx, Count = 71 }
            { _id = Brooklyn, Count = 173 }
            { _id = Staten Island, Count = 20 }
            { _id = Missing, Count = 2 }
            { _id = Manhattan, Count = 221 }
            { _id = Queens, Count = 204 }      

> To learn more about using LINQ and Builders to construct aggregation pipelines,
> see :ref:`csharp-linq` and :ref:`Builders <csharp-builders-aggregation>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more about using LINQ and Builders to construct aggregation pipelines,
see the :ref:`csharp-linq`guide and the :ref:`csharp-builders-aggregation` section of the Operations with Builders guide.
```

performing aggregation operations:

- Returned documents must not violate the :manual:`BSON document size limit </reference/limits/#mongodb-limit-BSON-Document-Size>`
  of 16 megabytes.

- Pipeline stages have a memory limit of 100 megabytes by default. If required, you can exceed this limit by setting
  the `AllowDiskUse <{+new-api-root+}/MongoDB.Driver/MongoDB.Driver.AggregateOptions.AllowDiskUse.html#MongoDB_Driver_AggregateOptions_AllowDiskUse>`__
  property of the ``AggregateOptions`` object that you pass to the ``Aggregate()`` method.

- The :manual:`$graphLookup </reference/operator/aggregation/graphLookup/>` stage has
  a strict memory limit of 100 megabytes and ignores the ``AllowDiskUse`` property.

Aggregation Example
-------------------

To perform an aggregation, pass a list of aggregation stages to the
``IMongoCollection<TDocument>.Aggregate()`` method.

.. note::
  
  This example uses the ``sample_restaurants.restaurants`` collection
  from the :atlas:`Atlas sample datasets </sample-data>`. To learn how to create a
  free MongoDB Atlas cluster and load the sample datasets, see :ref:`csharp-quickstart`.

> The following code example produces a count of the number of bakeries in each borough
> of New York. To do so, it uses an aggregation pipeline with the following stages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following code example produces a count of the number of bakeries in each borough
of New York City. To do so, it uses an aggregation pipeline that contains the following stages:
```

- A :manual:`$match </reference/operator/aggregation/match/>` stage to filter for documents whose
  ``cuisine`` field contains the value ``"Bakery"``.

- A :manual:`$group </reference/operator/aggregation/group/>` stage to group the matching
  documents by the ``borough`` field, accumulating a count of documents for each distinct value
  of that field.

> The following sections contain versions of this example that each provide different 
> approaches to creating and combining the aggregation stages used in the example pipeline. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following sections implement this example by using LINQ, Builders, and BsonDocument 
approaches to create and combine the aggregation stages used in the example pipeline.
```

      :language: csharp
      :dedent:
      :start-after: begin-aggregation
      :end-before: end-aggregation
   
   .. output::
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      { _id = Bronx, Count = 71 }
      { _id = Brooklyn, Count = 173 }
      { _id = Staten Island, Count = 20 }
      { _id = Missing, Count = 2 }
      { _id = Manhattan, Count = 221 }
      { _id = Queens, Count = 204 }

To learn more about using builders to construct aggregation pipelines,
see the :ref:`csharp-builders-aggregation` section of the Operations with Builders guide.       

BsonDocument Approach
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. io-code-block::

   .. input:: /includes/fundamentals/code-examples/Aggregation.cs
      :language: csharp
      :dedent:
      :start-after: begin-aggregation
      :end-before: end-aggregation

   .. output::
      :language: console
      :visible: false

      { "_id" : "Brooklyn", "count" : 173 }
      { "_id" : "Manhattan", "count" : 221 }
      { "_id" : "Bronx", "count" : 71 }
      { "_id" : "Missing", "count" : 2 }
      { "_id" : "Staten Island", "count" : 20 }
      { "_id" : "Queens", "count" : 204 }

> 

Reviewer: S: add a note here explaining why users should prefer to use one of the other APIs
